
Honest Scaling for Time-Series Score Charts

A reference for rendering aim-trainer score progression (PB, average, low-average) without visually inflating or flattening real change.

Written to be used as implementation context.

1. The problem being solved

Any chart of a score over time makes an implicit claim about 

how much

 the score changed. That claim is controlled almost entirely by the

y-axis range, and the y-axis range is usually chosen by a default that has nothing to do with meaning: fit the data to the frame. Auto-

fitting min/max is the single biggest source of visual dishonesty in progress charts, because it stretches whatever variation exists to fill

the available height. A flat plateau and a genuine breakthrough render identically. The viewer cannot tell them apart.

Tufte's 

lie factor

 formalises this:

lie_factor = (size of effect shown in graphic) / (size of effect in data)

A lie factor of 1.0 is honest. Auto-fit axes on noisy data routinely produce lie factors of 5–20. The goal is not to force a lie factor of

exactly 1 — that would make most real progress invisible — but to make the distortion 

principled and constant

 rather than accidental and

variable.

2. Baseline rules by chart type

Encoding

Zero

baseline

Reason

Bar / column /

area

Required

The mark's 

length

 encodes the value. Truncating the axis makes the length ratio between bars a lie. 

A bar chart with

a cut axis is always wrong.

Line / dot /

scatter

Not

required

Position encodes the value and slope encodes change. Zero carries no information for scores whose meaningful

range is a narrow band far from zero.

Score progression is a line/dot encoding. A truncated y-axis is legitimate. But it must be truncated to a 

defensible

 range,

not an auto-fitted one.

3. Core rule: scale by variability, not by range

The defensible range comes from the noise in the data. A score is not a fixed quantity; it is a sample from a distribution whose spread

reflects consistency, warm-up state, and luck. The unit of "how big is this change" should therefore be the standard deviation of that

distribution — the same idea as an effect size (Cohen's 

d

).

mu    = mean(runs_in_window)

sigma = stddev(runs_in_window)

y_min = mu - K * sigma

y_max = mu + K * sigma      // K = 3.5 is a good default

Consequences of this rule, all of which are desirable:

A 2

σ

 improvement occupies twice the vertical distance of a 1

σ

 improvement. Improvements become 

visually comparable to each

other.

Run-to-run noise renders as noise. It occupies a small, consistent fraction of the frame instead of filling it.

A player with high consistency (small 

σ

) gets a tighter axis, so their smaller-but-real gains stay visible. 

A streaky player gets a wider

axis, so their swings do not read as progress.

A genuinely flat period looks flat. This is the property auto-fit destroys.

Tuning K: lower K (2.5–3) magnifies change and is better for short windows; higher K (4–5) is more conservative. Expose it as a setting rather than

hard-coding, but default it and never let the axis fall back to min/max.

Clamping

Two guards are needed. If 

σ

 is very small (a scenario with few runs, or an unusually consistent streak) the axis can collapse and re-

amplify noise; enforce a minimum span as a percentage of the mean. And the window must always contain every plotted point, so

expand the range if any run falls outside it rather than clipping the line.

span     = max(K * sigma, MIN_SPAN_PCT * mu)     // MIN_SPAN_PCT ~ 0.04

y_min    = min(mu - span, min(visible_points))

y_max    = max(mu + span, max(visible_points))

4. Freeze the σ window so the axis does not jitter

If 

σ

 is recomputed over all visible data every render, the axis changes shape every session and two screenshots taken a week apart are

not comparable. Compute 

σ

 over a 

fixed trailing window

 — the last N runs (50 is a reasonable default) or a fixed number of days —

and hold that scale while the user pans or zooms the time axis.

Zooming the x-axis must never rescale the y-axis. If it does, the same improvement changes apparent size depending on

how far the user has scrolled, which is exactly the distortion this document exists to prevent.

5. Draw the noise floor explicitly

This is the highest-value change in the whole document, because it makes the chart self-calibrating. Rather than asking the viewer to

trust the axis, show them the spread directly:

Plot 

every individual run

 as a small low-opacity dot behind the aggregate lines.

Draw a shaded band at 

±1

σ

 around the rolling mean

.

Keep PB, average, and low-average as distinct lines on top.

The interpretation then becomes visual and immediate: 

a point or trend that clears the band is real progress; one that sits inside the band is

a good day.

 No axis choice can mislead a viewer who can see the noise floor, which is what makes this robust in a way that axis rules

alone are not.

Related: a single PB is an extreme-value statistic and is inherently noisier than a mean. PB lines will always look jumpier than average lines even when

nothing has changed. Rendering PB as a step function rather than a smooth line makes its ratchet nature explicit and discourages reading slope into it.

6. Aspect ratio: bank to 45°

Cleveland's result on slope perception: humans judge rate of change most accurately when the average line segment sits near 45°. Charts

that are very wide and short flatten trends; tall and narrow charts exaggerate them. The aspect ratio is therefore part of the honesty of

the chart, not just its styling.

// after y-range is fixed, choose width for a given height (or vice versa)

median_abs_slope_in_data_units = median(|y[i+1] - y[i]|)   // per x step

target: (median_abs_slope / y_span) * plot_height

        ~= (1 / n_visible_points) * plot_width

Full auto-banking is often impractical in a fixed layout. A workable approximation: keep the plot area near a 2:1 width:height ratio, and

if the visible window is very long, either reduce the point count via aggregation or allow horizontal scrolling rather than compressing

more points into the same width.

7. Comparing across scenarios

Raw scores are not comparable between scenarios — different scoring formulas produce wildly different scales and different natural

variances. Any multi-scenario view must normalise:

Transform

Formula

Use when

Percent change from baseline

(x - x0) / x0

Communicating progress to a person; intuitive and directly readable.

Z-score

(x - mu) / sigma

Asking "where am I strong or weak"; puts every scenario in units of its own noise.

Log scale

log(x)

Gains are multiplicative; equal vertical distance means equal percentage gain.

Percent change is the better default for a progress view. Z-scores are the better default for a comparison view. Do not mix them on one

axis.

8. Sensitivity as a confound

Runs at different cm/360 values are not samples from the same distribution, so pooling them inflates 

σ

 and corrupts every calculation

above. Filtering to a single sensitivity before computing statistics is a precondition for this whole scheme, not an optional view setting. If

a chart is showing mixed sensitivities, either split it into separate series or label the scale as uncomparable.

9. Implementation checklist

1. 

Filter runs to one scenario and one cm/360.

2. 

Compute µ and 

σ

 over a fixed trailing window (default: last 50 runs).

3. 

Set y-range to µ ± max(3.5

σ

, 4% of µ), expanded to contain all visible points.

4. 

Hold that y-range constant across x-axis zoom and pan.

5. 

Render individual runs as faint dots; render a ±1

σ

 band around the rolling mean.

6. 

Render average and low-average as lines; render PB as a step function.

7. 

Keep the plot area near 2:1; aggregate or scroll rather than compressing many points.

8. 

Never use a bar chart with a truncated axis.

9. 

For cross-scenario views, switch to percent change or z-scores.

10. Anti-patterns

Auto-fit min/max y-axis.

 The default in most charting libraries. Disable it explicitly.

Y-axis rescaling on zoom.

 Makes the same change appear different sizes at different zoom levels.

Truncated bar charts.

 Always a lie factor greater than 1.

Heavy smoothing without showing raw points.

 A smoothed line implies a precision the data does 

not have; the reader loses all

sense of the noise floor.

Trend lines fitted through fewer than ~20 runs.

 Slope estimates on small samples are dominated 

by noise and will confidently

show progress that is not there.

Pooling sensitivities.

 Inflates 

σ

 and makes the band meaningless.
